chore(docs): wget reference docs (#3205)
open-component-model/open-component-model: website/content/docs/tutorials/wget-http-resources.md

live*, not about what you can configure.

If you just want the commands to add a file and download it back, start with the How-To guide 
[Add Resources from HTTP URLs]({{< relref "docs/how-to/add-resources-from-http-urls.md" >}}). This tutorial explains
the parts that guide leaves out: why you'd pick one type over the other, how credentials are matched, how the media
type is decided, how digest pinning protects you, and what changed since OCM v1.

## What You'll Learn

- When to embed a file (input type) and when to reference it by URL (access type)
- What happens to a Wget resource when you transfer the component version
- How OCM resolves a resource's media type
- How credentials are matched to a request, and how the three authentication methods interact
- How to pin a resource by digest so a changed file is rejected instead of silently accepted
- How to send a non-GET request and tune timeouts, retries, and the download directory
- What changed between OCM v1 and OCM v2, and how to migrate

## Prerequisites

- [OCM CLI]({{< relref "docs/getting-started/ocm-cli-installation.md" >}}) installed
- Comfortable adding a component version with `ocm add cv`; the

>   [how-to]({{< relref "docs/how-to/add-resources-from-http-urls.md" >}}) is a good warm-up

Reviewer: This tutorial does not have any steps to follow. Why do I need the prerequisites?

Reviewer 2: Hmmm, yeah, I should add some kind of thing to follow. 🤔

Reviewer 2: Decided in the warroom to create a followup to make the tutorial more tutorially later.

  version as a local blob. The original URL is not kept. The component version is now self-contained.

- With the **access type**, OCM stores the URL in the component descriptor and fetches the bytes only when someone asks
  for them. The URL stays the source of truth, which is what you want for a large file, or when consumers are meant to
  pull directly from the origin server.

The rule of thumb is: use **input type** when you want a reproducible copy, and the **access type** when the URL
is the authoritative location and should be used for accessing the resource.

## How transfer works {#how-transfer-works}

A Wget resource is always transferred by value.

When you run `ocm transfer cv`, an access-type resource does not stay a `Wget/v1` access in the target. OCM fetches the
bytes and writes them into the target as a [`LocalBlob/v1`]({{< relref "docs/reference/input-and-access-types.md#localblobv1" >}}). After a transfer
both will end up as local blobs.

This means:

1. You MUST pass the `--copy-resources` flag to `ocm transfer cv`. Without it, the resource is skipped, because there is no

>    way to transfer it without copying the bytes.

Reviewer: This confuses me :D

Isn't every resource skipped when `--copy-resources` is not present?

Reviewer 2: Sure...? I just copied this over. :D

2. The bytes are fetched *again at transfer time* and checked against the resource's digest. If the file behind the URL
   changed since the component version was built, the transfer fails instead of copying different content. That

>    check is what makes [digest pinning](#pin-a-digest) worth doing on an access-type resource.

Reviewer: > The bytes are fetched *again at transfer time* and checked against the resource's digest

The resource's digest from the component descriptor (if any)?

The file stays on the remote server only if the component version is never transferred. Transfer converts the `Wget/v1` reference into a `LocalBlob/v1`.

## Set the media type {#set-the-media-type}

> Every resource has a media type. For a Wget resource, OCM picks it in the following order and stops at the first one it finds:

Reviewer: > Every resource has a media type. For a Wget resource, ...

What is meant by "every resource"? Every Wget resource? If yes, then this sentence sound weird to me

Reviewer 2: No, I meant here that every resource in your component version has a media type technically. Like a general statement, you know? :D But yeah, it's confusing. I'll remove it. :)

| Bearer token             | `identityToken`                                                  | `Authorization: Bearer …` |
| Mutual TLS (client cert) | `certificate`, `privateKey`, and optional `certificateAuthority` | The TLS handshake         |

- Basic Auth and a bearer token both set the `Authorization` header, **so they are mutually exclusive.** If you
  configure both, the bearer token wins and OCM logs a warning.
- **The client certificate is separate.** It is applied during the TLS handshake, not in a header, so it works independent 
  of the other two.

{{< callout context="caution" >}}
Put secrets in your credential configuration, never in the specification. Anything you write into `url`, `header`, or
`body` (including `https://user:token@host/...` and presigned query parameters) is stored with the component version
(access type) or lives in your constructor file (input type). Neither is a safe place for a secret.
{{< /callout >}}

For the full field reference, see
[Credential Types: WgetCredentials/v1]({{< relref "docs/reference/credential-types.md#wgetcredentialsv1" >}}).

> ## Pin a digest {#pin-a-digest}

Reviewer: I still think this should be part of the How-To to show that this should be done (best practice)

Reviewer 2: 👍 Sure.

Reviewer: i saw you added the section back to the how-to. But what I actually meant was setting/pinning the digest in the component-constructor as part of the how-to :D and then maybe a little call out why this is important

Reviewer 2: Ah then say thaaaat. :DDDD

A Wget resource comes from a server you don't control, so it's good practice to check the content before you trust it
and then pin what you checked. Download the file, run whatever your process requires and hash the copy after:

```bash
sha256sum cli.tar     # Linux
shasum -a 256 cli.tar # macOS
```

Add that value as a `digest` on the resource. From then on, OCM hashes whatever it fetches and refuses to add the
resource if the hashes differ:

```yaml
resources:
  - name: ocm-cli
    type: blob
    version: 1.0.0
    relation: external
    digest:
      hashAlgorithm: SHA-256
      normalisationAlgorithm: genericBlobDigest/v1
      value: 6e3205bbad194f902ee8bdc5a712c47f7a5443fabfd066ef1e95088c837fe0ae
    access:
      type: Wget/v1
      url: https://github.com/open-component-model/open-component-model/releases/download/v0.12.0/cli.tar
      mediaType: application/x-tar
```

The `digest` block is optional and works on both the input and the access type. If set, these are the exact fields:

- `hashAlgorithm` MUST be `SHA-256`. It is the only algorithm the Wget resource repository computes. `sha256` and

>   `SHA256` do not match.

Reviewer: This sounds like a bug. Is there a reason we cannot use another algo (other than "its not implemented")?

Reviewer 2: It's not implemented. :))) that's all.

> - `normalisationAlgorithm` MUST be `genericBlobDigest/v1`, which means "hash the raw bytes, no normalisation".

Reviewer: This is also weird. Why should the user be required to set this?

(So sorry, you are probably just writing down what is implemented - but this sounds odd to me :D)

Reviewer 2: No idea, just copied this. I would have to check.

Reviewer 2: ```go
type Digest struct {
	HashAlgorithm          string `json:"hashAlgorithm"`
	NormalisationAlgorithm string `json:"normalisationAlgorithm"`
	Value                  string `json:"value"`
}
```

It's a required field. It must be set. :)

Identity matching has been updated.

| Field             | OCM v1                             | OCM v2             | What to do                                                                                 |
|-------------------|------------------------------------|--------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Consumer identity | `type: wget`                       | `type: Wget`       | Rename the type.                                                                           |
| Identity path     | `pathprefix`, longest-prefix match | `path`, glob match | Rename the attribute. `*` matches one path segment; omit `path` to match the whole host.   |

Further matching changes:

| Area            | OCM v1                                          | OCM v2                                                          |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Auth precedence | Basic Auth wins; the bearer token is a fallback | Bearer token wins; Basic Auth is used only when no token is set |

> | Basic Auth      | Needs both `username` and `password`            | Sent as soon as `username` is set                               |

Reviewer: What does "Sent as soon as `username` is set" mean?

Reviewer 2: Eh this should be username is enough. :D

| Custom CA       | Root CAs from credentials always applied        | `certificateAuthority` applied only alongside `certificate`     |

### Constructor changes {#constructor-changes}

| Field        | OCM v1       | OCM v2                    | What to do                                    |
|--------------|--------------|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|

> | Input `body` | Plain string | Base64-encoded byte slice | Base64-encode the body in the constructor.    |

Reviewer: what is meant with "Input" in "Input `body`"?

Reviewer 2: the body field in the input spec. :)

---

> title: "Work with HTTP Resources"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: "Working with HTTP Resources"
```

Reviewer 3: to be aligned with the other tutorials

description: "Understand the Wget input and access types in depth: the input/access model, credentials, media types, digest pinning, download tuning, and migrating from OCM v1."
icon: "🌐"
weight: 62
toc: true
---

## Overview

OCM can add a file served over HTTP or HTTPS to a component version using the `Wget/v1` type. There is one download
engine underneath, with two front doors:

- The **input type** downloads the file while the component version is built and stores the bytes inside it.
- The **access type** stores only the URL and leaves the bytes on the remote server.

They share the same download, credential, and configuration code, so the choice between them is about *where the bytes
live*, not about what you can configure.

> If you just want the commands to add a file and download it back, start with the how-to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you just want the commands to add a file and download it back, start with the How-To guide 
```

[Add Resources from HTTP URLs]({{< relref "docs/how-to/add-resources-from-http-urls.md" >}}). This tutorial explains
the parts that guide leaves out: why you'd pick one type over the other, how credentials are matched, how the media
type is decided, how digest pinning protects you, and what changed since OCM v1.

## What You'll Learn

- When to embed a file (input type) and when to reference it by URL (access type)
- What happens to a Wget resource when you transfer the component version

> - How OCM decides a resource's media type

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- How OCM resolves a resource's media type
```

- How credentials are matched to a request, and how the three authentication methods interact

> - How to pin a digest so a changed file is rejected instead of silently accepted

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- How to pin a resource by digest so a changed file is rejected instead of silently accepted
```

- How to send a non-GET request and tune timeouts, retries, and the download directory
- What changed between OCM v1 and OCM v2, and how to migrate

## Prerequisites

- [OCM CLI]({{< relref "docs/getting-started/ocm-cli-installation.md" >}}) installed
- Comfortable adding a component version with `ocm add cv`; the
  [how-to]({{< relref "docs/how-to/add-resources-from-http-urls.md" >}}) is a good warm-up

## Input or access: where the bytes live {#choosing-input-or-access}

> Both describe the same resource with the same fields. The only difference is *when* the file is fetched and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both types describe the same resource with the same fields. The only difference is *when* the file is fetched and
```

*where* it ends up.

- With the **input type**, OCM downloads the file the moment you run `ocm add cv` and stores it inside the component
  version as a local blob. The original URL is not kept. The component version is now self-contained.

- With the **access type**, OCM stores the URL in the component descriptor and fetches the bytes only when someone asks
  for them. The URL stays the source of truth, which is what you want for a large file, or when consumers are meant to
  pull directly from the origin server.

The rule of thumb is: use **input type** when you want a reproducible copy, and the **access type** when the URL
is the authoritative location and should be used for accessing the resource.

## How transfer works {#how-transfer-works}

A Wget resource is always transferred by value.

When you run `ocm transfer cv`, an access-type resource does not stay a `Wget/v1` access in the target. OCM fetches the
bytes and writes them into the target as a [`LocalBlob/v1`]({{< relref "docs/reference/input-and-access-types.md#localblobv1" >}}). After a transfer

> both will end up as local blobs.

Reviewer 3: what is meant by "both"?

This means:

> 1. You MUST pass `--copy-resources true` to `ocm transfer cv`. Without it, the resource is skipped, because there is no

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. You MUST pass the `--copy-resources` flag to `ocm transfer cv`. Without it, the resource is skipped, because there is no
```

   way to transfer it without copying the bytes.
2. The bytes are fetched *again at transfer time* and checked against the resource's digest. If the file behind the URL
   changed since the component version was built, the transfer fails instead of copying different content. That
   check is what makes [digest pinning](#pin-a-digest) worth doing on an access-type resource.

"Keep the bytes on the server" property of the access type is only true if the component version stays where it

> was built. During a transfer it will end up as an embedded blob.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The file stays on the remote server only if the component version is never transferred. Transfer converts the `Wget/v1` reference into a `LocalBlob/v1`.
```

## Set the media type {#set-the-media-type}

> Every resource has a media type. For a Wget resource, OCM picks it in this order and stops at the first one it finds:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every resource has a media type. For a Wget resource, OCM picks it in the following order and stops at the first one it finds:
```

1. The `mediaType` field in your specification, if you set it.
2. The `Content-Type` header the server returns.
3. `application/octet-stream`, as a last resort.

> Practical advice is: **set `mediaType` yourself whenever the server doesn't return a useful `Content-Type`.**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Practical advice**: set `mediaType` yourself whenever the server doesn't return a useful `Content-Type`.
```

> The most common example is GitHub release assets. GitHub serves all of them as `application/octet-stream` no matter what

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The most common examples are GitHub release assets. GitHub serves all of them as `application/octet-stream`, no matter what
```

they actually are, so a `.tar` file would end up with a meaningless media type unless you set `mediaType:
application/x-tar` explicitly.

{{< callout context="note" >}}
OCM v2 does **not** guess the media type from the file extension in the URL. OCM v1 did. See
[Migrate from OCM v1](#migrating-from-ocm-v1) if you are moving old constructor files across.
{{< /callout >}}

## Authentication {#authentication}

> Credentials are resolved through OCM's normal credential system. Never add authentication to a URL directly. OCM

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Credentials are resolved through OCM's normal [credential system]({{< relref "docs/concepts/credential-system.md" >}}). Never add authentication to a URL directly. OCM
```

the URL and uses the matching consumer entry's credentials for the request. Because the input type and the access type
build that identity the same way, one entry will work for both, building the component version, and downloading the resource.
For how identities are matched and resolved, see [Understand Credential Resolution]({{< relref "docs/tutorials/credential-resolution.md" >}}).

Wget's credential type is: `WgetCredentials/v1`.

### Authentication methods {#auth-methods}

`WgetCredentials/v1` supports three methods:

| Method                   | Fields                                                           | Sets                      |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| HTTP Basic Auth          | `username`, `password`                                           | `Authorization: Basic …`  |
| Bearer token             | `identityToken`                                                  | `Authorization: Bearer …` |
| Mutual TLS (client cert) | `certificate`, `privateKey`, and optional `certificateAuthority` | The TLS handshake         |

> - **Basic Auth and a bearer token both set the `Authorization` header, so they are mutually exclusive.** If you

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Basic Auth and a bearer token both set the `Authorization` header, **so they are mutually exclusive.** If you
```

  configure both, the bearer token wins and OCM logs a warning.
- **The client certificate is separate.** It is applied during the TLS handshake, not in a header, so it works independent 
  of the other two.

{{< callout context="caution" >}}
Put secrets in your credential configuration, never in the specification. Anything you write into `url`, `header`, or
`body` (including `https://user:token@host/...` and presigned query parameters) is stored with the component version

> (access type) or lives in your constructor file (input type). Both are places a secret should never be at.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(access type) or lives in your constructor file (input type). Neither is a safe place for a secret.
```

```bash
sha256sum cli.tar     # Linux
shasum -a 256 cli.tar # macOS
```

Add that value as a `digest` on the resource. From then on, OCM hashes whatever it fetches and refuses to add the
resource if the hashes differ:

```yaml
resources:
  - name: ocm-cli
    type: blob
    version: 1.0.0
    relation: external
    digest:
      hashAlgorithm: SHA-256
      normalisationAlgorithm: genericBlobDigest/v1
      value: 6e3205bbad194f902ee8bdc5a712c47f7a5443fabfd066ef1e95088c837fe0ae
    access:
      type: Wget/v1
      url: https://github.com/open-component-model/open-component-model/releases/download/v0.12.0/cli.tar
      mediaType: application/x-tar
```

The `digest` block is optional and works on both the input and the access type. If set, these are the exact fields:

- `hashAlgorithm` MUST be `SHA-256`. It is the only algorithm the Wget resource repository computes. `sha256` and
  `SHA256` do not match.
- `normalisationAlgorithm` MUST be `genericBlobDigest/v1`, which means "hash the raw bytes, no normalisation".
- `value` is the bare lowercase hex digest, with **no** `sha256:` prefix.

> ### Why access-type pinning {#why-access-type-pinning

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Why access-type pinning {#why-access-type-pinning}
```

For the access type, the digest is checked again every time the component version is transferred, because the bytes are

> re-fetched at transfer time (see [How transfer works](#how-transfer-works)). So a file that changes *after* you publish

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
re-fetched at transfer time (see [How transfer works](#how-transfer-works)). So, a file that changes *after* you publish
```

the component version makes the next transfer fail, rather than silently swapping in different content.

```text
digest mismatch: expected 6e3205bb…, got 3b1f0c72…                          # access type
resource blob digest mismatch: resource 6e3205bb… vs blob sha256:3b1f0c72…  # input type
```

## Send a non-GET request {#non-get-requests}

> By default, OCM sends a `GET`. To send something else, set `verb`, and optionally `header` and `body`. `body` is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, OCM sends a `GET` request. To send something else, set `verb`, and optionally `header` and `body`. `body` is
```

base64-encoded in YAML, because the underlying field is a byte slice:

```yaml
resources:
  - name: report
    type: blob
    version: 1.0.0
    input:
      type: Wget/v1
      url: https://api.example.com/reports
      verb: POST
      mediaType: application/json
      header:
        Accept:
          - application/json
        X-Request-Source:
          - ocm
      # base64 of {"format":"json"}
      body: eyJmb3JtYXQiOiJqc29uIn0=
```

## Fine-tuning the download {#fine-tuning-the-download}

**Only successful responses are accepted.** OCM accepts a 2xx status and fails on anything else. Redirects are followed by
default. If you set `noRedirect: true`, the request fails.

**Downloads are streamed to disk, not held in memory.** The response body is written straight to a temporary file, so
memory use stays flat no matter how big the file is. There is no size limit by default. That temporary file is created

> under the `tempFolder` of the `filesystem.config.ocm.software/v1alpha1` configuration, falling back to the operating

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
under the `tempFolder` of the `filesystem.config.ocm.software/v1alpha1` attribute in the .ocmconfig configuration file, falling back to the operating
```

system's temp directory if no configuration is provided.

**Timeouts, retries, and per-host settings** come from the `http.config.ocm.software/v1alpha1` configuration and apply
to every Wget request:

```yaml
type: generic.config.ocm.software/v1
configurations:
  - type: filesystem.config.ocm.software/v1alpha1
    tempFolder: /var/tmp/ocm
  - type: http.config.ocm.software/v1alpha1
    timeout: 2m
    retry:
      maxRetries: 3
    hosts:
      github.com:
        timeout: 5m
```

See [HTTP Client Configuration]({{< relref "docs/reference/http-client-configuration.md" >}}) for the full schema,
defaults, and how per-host settings are merged.

## Migrate from OCM v1 {#migrating-from-ocm-v1}

If you are bringing constructor files or credential config over from OCM v1, keep these in mind. The credential changes

> are the most important ones.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Three things changed between OCM v1 and v2: credential matching, constructor syntax, and behavior. The credential changes are the most likely to break existing configurations.
```

Reviewer 3: Mentioning the credential changes as the most important ones, you should move them directly below this sentence, as the first.

### Constructor changes {#constructor-changes}

| Field        | OCM v1       | OCM v2                    | What to do                                    |
|--------------|--------------|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Input `body` | Plain string | Base64-encoded byte slice | Base64-encode the body in the constructor.    |

> In OCM v1 the body was an `io.Reader`, which has no YAML form. In OCM v2 it is a byte slice, therefor it needs to be base64.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In OCM v1 the body was an `io.Reader`, which has no YAML form. In OCM v2 it is a byte slice, therefore it needs to be base64.
```

### Behavior changes{#behavior-changes}

| Area        | OCM v1                                                                             | OCM v2                                                    |
|-------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| Media type  | `mediaType` → `Content-Type` → **URL file extension** → `application/octet-stream` | `mediaType` → `Content-Type` → `application/octet-stream` |
| Minimum TLS | TLS 1.3                                                                            | TLS 1.2                                                   |

> OCM v2 **dropped** the file-extension guess, so a `.tar.gz` URL that used to resolve to `application/x-gzip` on its own now

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OCM v2 **dropped** the file-extension guess, so a `.tar.gz` URL that used to resolve to `application/x-gzip` on its own, now
```

needs an explicit `mediaType`.

> ### Credential changes {#credential-changes}

Reviewer 3: move this section ^^up as the first of the three points you mention.

Reviewer 2: done 👍

| Identity path     | `pathprefix`, longest-prefix match | `path`, glob match | Rename the attribute. `*` matches one path segment; omit `path` to match the whole host.   |

Further matching changes:

| Area            | OCM v1                                          | OCM v2                                                          |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Auth precedence | Basic Auth wins; the bearer token is a fallback | Bearer token wins; Basic Auth is used only when no token is set |
| Basic Auth      | Needs both `username` and `password`            | Sent as soon as `username` is set                               |
| Custom CA       | Root CAs from credentials always applied        | `certificateAuthority` applied only alongside `certificate`     |

## Troubleshooting {#troubleshooting}

### `401 Unauthorized` from the server

**Why:** Either the credentials are wrong, or no consumer entry matched the identity OCM built from the URL. No matching

> entry is difficult to debug because there was no entry matched which assumes no credentials were provided.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Why:** Either the credentials are wrong, or no consumer entry matched the identity OCM built from the URL.  The second case is hard to spot: when nothing matches, OCM sends the request without credentials and the server returns the same 401 either way.
```
